README.md, before:

# octoscan

## [OctoSAM Inventory](https://www.octosoft.ch) scanner for Linux

### What's new

#### Release 1.10.7 - November 2023

Octoscan 1.10.7 no longer depends on the python distro module.
On most Linux variants - even on minimal installs - the scanner should now be able to run directly
without the need to install any additional Linux packages or Python modules.

**_NOTE_** Windows support has been removed from octoscan. 
    Windows support was previously only used for module testing.

Requires OctoSAM server version 1.10.6 or newer.

#### Release 1.10.6 - September 2023

**_NOTE:_** python 2.6 is no longer supported, minimum version is now python 2.7 or python 3.6

**_NOTE:_** macOS support has been removed from this version of the python based scanner.
   Apple does no longer distribute python with the base operating system.

**_NOTE:_** Scan of Linux VMs under Hyper-V requires OctoSAM Server version 1.10.6 or newer to import
produced .scal files. However, import of .scal files produced by older Linux scanners is
still supported in OctoSAM Server 1.10.6.

## Installation and basic operation

The scan module for Linux is a Python script delivered as a Python archive.

### Download octoscan from github

Download the latest version from the github master branch. 
Note that some distros provide curl while others provide wget by default. 
For uploading the produced scan files we recommend
that you install curl if it's not already installed.

#### Download using curl

```sh
curl -OL https://github.com/octosoft/octoscan/raw/master/octoscan.pyz
chmod +x octoscan.pyz
```

#### Download using wget

```sh
wget https://github.com/octosoft/octoscan/raw/master/octoscan.pyz
chmod +x octoscan.pyz
```

#### Download using git

This includes the source code of the scanner

```sh
mkdir projects
cd projects
git clone https://github.com/octosoft/octoscan
```

### Invocation and collection of generated files

Usually the scanner is invoked using existing management infrastructure.

On workstations and client systems, it's highly recommended to start the scanner in the user's 
context (logon scripts,) as that gives you valuable device affinity information. 

On servers, the scanner should be started in the root context, otherwise scanned information
may be incomplete.

```bash
FILE=$(./octoscan.pyz -o /tmp)
```

The program emits the generated filename to stdout, use the variable `${FILE}` to further process the file. 
You are completely free on how to transfer the generated files to the OctoSAM Import Service import folder.

A list of all options can be obtained using the help option

```bash
./octoscan.pyz --help
```

### Common error messages when starting the scanner

```
Unsupported Python2 Version:
Unsupported Python3 Version:
```
Your system does not meet the minimum requirement of either Python 2.7 or 3.6 or newer.

```
-bash: ./octoscan.pyz: Permission denied
```
You probably forgot to set execution permissions on the file octoscan.pyz

```
/usr/bin/env 'python': No such file or directory
```
Your system does not have a python interpreter registered under the name python.
Most likely you are on a more recent Linux system that has python3 as the default
python environment. You need to start the scanner using the python3 command:
```bash
python3 octoscan.pyz
```

### Using an upload server

Octosoft provides a Windows / IIS based upload server for the generated .scan files. A high-performance Linux based upload server is also provided based at [octo-collect](https://github.com/octosoft/octopus-resty), this open source server is based on [openresty](https://openresty.org).

Use the curl utility on Linux and Mac to upload the generated file.

Very simple example:

```bash
FILE=$(./octoscan.pyz -o /tmp)
if curl -F "upload=@${FILE}" http://youruploadserver.yourdomain:8080/upload
then
    rm ${FILE}
fi
```

In practice, you need to add error handling and ideally handle the case that the upload server may not
be available by caching generated .scal files. 

### Linux Java process scan
Octoscan performs an in-depth scan of running java processes. If run under root 
the scan will read all java processes. Otherwise, it reads processes running under the same user as the scan only.
If not running under root, the scan user must have permissions to start all detected java binaries 
as detailed version information can typically only be read through the java binary --version option.
For best java scan results on servers it's highly recommended to run the scan with root privileges.

### Linux Java filesystem scan
Octoscan scans common installation filesystem paths for java versions. 
If you have own conventions for installing software, specify the -J / --java option.
Paths that do not exist or are not accessible are silently ignored.
For best java scan results on servers it's highly recommended to run the scan with root privileges.

```bash
octoscan.pyz -java "/app/java:/u00/myapp/lib"
```

### Python Version

octoscan.pyz assumes that it is called using the current system implementation of python. 
Currently this is python 2.7 or 3.6 or newer on most systems. 
If called directly it uses the python available using `/usr/bin/env python`.

You can also call python explicitly:

```bash
python3 octoscan.pyz -o /tmp
```

### Why is the scanner dependent on python

We decided that a single dependency on a python-minimal installation is easier to handle than the multiple dependencies 
that we would have with a typical shell based scanner. 
The situation is different on macOS, where we can assume certain command-line programs are installed on every machine. 

Due to the diversity of Linux implementations, the Linux scanner is quite more complex than the macOS scanner.
Python allows us to implement a complex scan without writing temporary files, this improves performance considerably.
Python programs are generally easier to maintain and debug than shell scripts.

### Open file format

The produced file is a zip archive that contains all information as clear text.
You can unzip the archive to see what got scanned.

```bash
unzip f74ecf32-38b7-4e24-9a7e-f262d7d5e26b.scal
```

### Scanner source license

The source code of the Linux scanner is licensed under the MIT open source license. 

### Network prerequisites

For best results, all machines in your network should have synchronized clocks.
Otherwise date and time information in the inventory can be unreliable.

### Notes for specific Linux variants

The supported Linux variants are tested with their standard installs. 
If you use a minimal install, some required modules may not be installed by default.

#### RHEL 8, Centos 8, Rocky Linux 8 minimal install

The python3 command may not be installed by default. The standard system python is python 3.6.

```shell
sudo yum update
sudo yum install python3
curl -OL https://github.com/octosoft/octoscan/raw/master/octoscan.pyz
sudo python3 octoscan.pyz
```

#### RHEL 9, Centos 9, Rocky Linux 9 minimal install

The python command is installed by default and points to python 3.9. 

```shell
curl -OL https://github.com/octosoft/octoscan/raw/master/octoscan.pyz
chmod +x octoscan.pyz
sudo ./octoscan.pyz
```

#### Ubuntu minimal install 

Some minimum ubuntu installs do not include Python by default. 
In that case you need to first install python-minimal.

```bash
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install python-minimal
curl -OL https://github.com/octosoft/octoscan/raw/master/octoscan.pyz
sudo python octoscan.pyz
```

#### Debian 12 minimal network install (with standard utilities)

The python command is installed and points to Python 3.10.
Note that curl may not be installed by default. We recommend to use curl to upload the generated .scan files to the
OctoSAM upload server.

```bash
wget https://github.com/octosoft/octoscan/raw/master/octoscan.pyz
sudo python3 ./octoscan.pyz
# optionally install curl:
# sudo apt update
# sudo apt install curl
```

Commit message:

update README.md for SLES 15 minimal

README.md, after:

# octoscan

## [OctoSAM Inventory](https://www.octosoft.ch) scanner for Linux

### What's new

#### Release 1.10.7 - November 2023

Octoscan 1.10.7 no longer depends on the python distro module.
On most Linux variants - even on minimal installs - the scanner should now be able to run directly
without the need to install any additional Linux packages or Python modules.

**_NOTE_** Windows support has been removed from octoscan. 
    Windows support was previously only used for module testing.

Requires OctoSAM server version 1.10.6 or newer.

#### Release 1.10.6 - September 2023

**_NOTE:_** python 2.6 is no longer supported, minimum version is now python 2.7 or python 3.6

**_NOTE:_** macOS support has been removed from this version of the python based scanner.
   Apple does no longer distribute python with the base operating system.

**_NOTE:_** Scan of Linux VMs under Hyper-V requires OctoSAM Server version 1.10.6 or newer to import
produced .scal files. However, import of .scal files produced by older Linux scanners is
still supported in OctoSAM Server 1.10.6.

## Installation and basic operation

The scan module for Linux is a Python script delivered as a Python archive.

### Download octoscan from github

Download the latest version from the github master branch. 
Note that some distros provide curl while others provide wget by default. 
For uploading the produced scan files we recommend
that you install curl if it's not already installed.

#### Download using curl

```sh
curl -OL https://github.com/octosoft/octoscan/raw/master/octoscan.pyz
chmod +x octoscan.pyz
```

#### Download using wget

```sh
wget https://github.com/octosoft/octoscan/raw/master/octoscan.pyz
chmod +x octoscan.pyz
```

#### Download using git

This includes the source code of the scanner

```sh
mkdir projects
cd projects
git clone https://github.com/octosoft/octoscan
```

### Invocation and collection of generated files

Usually the scanner is invoked using existing management infrastructure.

On workstations and client systems, it's highly recommended to start the scanner in the user's 
context (logon scripts,) as that gives you valuable device affinity information. 

On servers, the scanner should be started in the root context, otherwise scanned information
may be incomplete.

```bash
FILE=$(./octoscan.pyz -o /tmp)
```

The program emits the generated filename to stdout, use the variable `${FILE}` to further process the file. 
You are completely free on how to transfer the generated files to the OctoSAM Import Service import folder.

A list of all options can be obtained using the help option

```bash
./octoscan.pyz --help
```

### Common error messages when starting the scanner

```
Unsupported Python2 Version:
Unsupported Python3 Version:
```
Your system does not meet the minimum requirement of either Python 2.7 or 3.6 or newer.

```
-bash: ./octoscan.pyz: Permission denied
```
You probably forgot to set execution permissions on the file octoscan.pyz

```
/usr/bin/env 'python': No such file or directory
```
Your system does not have a python interpreter registered under the name python.
Most likely you are on a more recent Linux system that has python3 as the default
python environment. You need to start the scanner using the python3 command:
```bash
python3 octoscan.pyz
```

### Using an upload server

Octosoft provides a Windows / IIS based upload server for the generated .scan files. A high-performance Linux based upload server is also provided based at [octo-collect](https://github.com/octosoft/octopus-resty), this open source server is based on [openresty](https://openresty.org).

Use the curl utility on Linux and Mac to upload the generated file.

Very simple example:

```bash
FILE=$(./octoscan.pyz -o /tmp)
if curl -F "upload=@${FILE}" http://youruploadserver.yourdomain:8080/upload
then
    rm ${FILE}
fi
```

In practice, you need to add error handling and ideally handle the case that the upload server may not
be available by caching generated .scal files. 

### Linux Java process scan
Octoscan performs an in-depth scan of running java processes. If run under root 
the scan will read all java processes. Otherwise, it reads processes running under the same user as the scan only.
If not running under root, the scan user must have permissions to start all detected java binaries 
as detailed version information can typically only be read through the java binary --version option.
For best java scan results on servers it's highly recommended to run the scan with root privileges.

### Linux Java filesystem scan
Octoscan scans common installation filesystem paths for java versions. 
If you have own conventions for installing software, specify the -J / --java option.
Paths that do not exist or are not accessible are silently ignored.
For best java scan results on servers it's highly recommended to run the scan with root privileges.

```bash
octoscan.pyz -java "/app/java:/u00/myapp/lib"
```

### Python Version

octoscan.pyz assumes that it is called using the current system implementation of python. 
Currently this is python 2.7 or 3.6 or newer on most systems. 
If called directly it uses the python available using `/usr/bin/env python`.

You can also call python explicitly:

```bash
python3 octoscan.pyz -o /tmp
```

### Why is the scanner dependent on python

We decided that a single dependency on a python-minimal installation is easier to handle than the multiple dependencies 
that we would have with a typical shell based scanner. 
The situation is different on macOS, where we can assume certain command-line programs are installed on every machine. 

Due to the diversity of Linux implementations, the Linux scanner is quite more complex than the macOS scanner.
Python allows us to implement a complex scan without writing temporary files, this improves performance considerably.
Python programs are generally easier to maintain and debug than shell scripts.

### Open file format

The produced file is a zip archive that contains all information as clear text.
You can unzip the archive to see what got scanned.

```bash
unzip f74ecf32-38b7-4e24-9a7e-f262d7d5e26b.scal
```

### Scanner source license

The source code of the Linux scanner is licensed under the MIT open source license. 

### Network prerequisites

For best results, all machines in your network should have synchronized clocks.
Otherwise date and time information in the inventory can be unreliable.

### Notes for specific Linux variants

The supported Linux variants are tested with their standard installs. 
If you use a minimal install, some required modules may not be installed by default.

#### RHEL 8, Centos 8, Rocky Linux 8 minimal install

The python3 command may not be installed by default. The standard system python is python 3.6.

```shell
sudo yum update
sudo yum install python3
curl -OL https://github.com/octosoft/octoscan/raw/master/octoscan.pyz
sudo python3 octoscan.pyz
```

#### RHEL 9, Centos 9, Rocky Linux 9 minimal install

The `python` command is installed by default and points to python 3.9. 

```shell
curl -OL https://github.com/octosoft/octoscan/raw/master/octoscan.pyz
chmod +x octoscan.pyz
sudo ./octoscan.pyz
```

#### Ubuntu minimal install 

Some minimum ubuntu installs do not include Python by default. 
In that case you need to first install python-minimal.

```bash
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install python-minimal
curl -OL https://github.com/octosoft/octoscan/raw/master/octoscan.pyz
sudo python octoscan.pyz
```

#### Debian 12 minimal network install (with standard utilities)

The `python` command is installed and points to Python 3.10.
Note that curl may not be installed by default. We recommend to use curl to upload the generated .scan files to the
OctoSAM upload server.

```bash
wget https://github.com/octosoft/octoscan/raw/master/octoscan.pyz
sudo python3 ./octoscan.pyz
# optionally install curl:
# sudo apt update
# sudo apt install curl
```

#### SLES 15 minimal install

The `python3` command points to Python 3.6. Execute the scanner with root permissions. Note that the sudo command may not be installed on SLES 15 minimal

```shell
curl -OL https://github.com/octosoft/octoscan/raw/master/octoscan.pyz
python3 octoscan.pyz
```
